5.2.1.3 Muon combinatorial background


Random combinations of muons which enter the vacuum vessel, either by back-scattering in
the surrounding cavern walls or due to the imperfection of the muon shield, may mimic signal
events. The rate of fully reconstructed muons inside the SHiP spectrometer has been estimated
with the full FairShip simulation to 7 kHz during the spill. In order to study the expected
combinatorial background the fully simulated residual muons (O(10)), which enter the decay
volume, are used to seed a toy MC to simulate the expected number of muons in the decay
volume (3.5 · 1010 muons, that is O(1012) muon pairs) in the five years of data taking. The
inherent systematic uncertainty of the toy MC generation requires further studies.
A basic set of kinematic and topological criteria, which are in line with the selection employed
in the signal sensitivity studies in Section 5.2.2, allows reducing the number of fake
dimuons. The cuts are summarized in Table 5.2.1.3.


Table 5.5: Effect of the loose offline pre-selection on the muon combinatorial background.
Cut Value
Track P > 1.5 GeV/c
Track χ
2/ndof < 25
dimuon DOCA < 1 cm
dimuon vertex fiducial
dimuon mass > 0.2 GeV/c
2
IP w.r.t target < 2.5 m
Efficiency 10−4


The first requirement specifically designed to suppress combinatorial background is the use
of the timing veto detectors described in Section 4.9. Using a timing window of 340 ps, corresponding
to three times the resolution of the timing detector, the number of dimuon vertices
with the muons in the window integrated over the assumed running time of the experiment
is O(10). Hence, the timing requirement contributes a factor ∼ 10−7
to the combinatorial
background suppression.
The residual combinatorial background is further suppressed by employing information from
the upstream veto detectors, as discussed in Section 4.6, as well as the surrounding background
tagger, as described in Section 4.5. This allows another reduction factor of 10−4
. Consequently,
the muon combinatorial background is reduced to < 0.1 events. Further studies are required
in order to fully understand the sources of muons penetrating into the decay volume.